# Science in the pursuit of a Trickster God

In recent times, scientific efforts seem to have focused on the hunt for beauty, most famously expunded and critized in string theory, where there is no data, only beautiful mathematics. That turns out to be very problematic, see Horgan's [Beauty Does Not Equal Truth](https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/cross-check/beauty-does-not-equal-truth-in-physics-or-elsewhere/) for an overview.

There's another recent case in biology, that of neutral theory, which based on mathematical models in the 50s, which are nice and clean. As it turns out, now that we have the data, things are much more complicated than previously thought, see Callier's [recent summary here](https://www.quantamagazine.org/neutral-theory-of-evolution-challenged-by-evidence-for-dna-selection-20181108/).

So in a nutshell, in research, things will always turn out to be more complicated than they seem to be.
Is there a reason for that? As an explanation, I'd half-jokingly like to posit the existence of a God, specifically, a Trickster God. Such deities have a rich history - most famously Loki in Norse mythology (or Marvel movies), the Igbo have Mbeku the trickster tortoise, Slavs have Veles, Ghana has Anansi, Japan has the Kitsune, and so on.

That God is not directly concerned with human affairs (have you looked around recently?!?) but instead it looks at scientific progress, and once researchers come too close to the border of what is knowable, our Trickster God wakes up, jumps in and quickly adds another, usually weirder and more complex layer to reality. Scientists break to the previous 'barrier' and find new land, previously unexpected, now just there like it always was there. That is the trick! Just like in a story involving time travel, the altered time-line looks like it has always looked like to its inhabitants, but the time traveler/researcher could *swear* that thing over there wasn't there before.

An example: the human genome project. Deciphering the DNA of a human was touted as the end of many diseases, the idea was that once we know the genetic basis we can go and fix the disease. As it turns out, it's way more complicated than that, with methylation, population variation, retroviruses, and so on. In a few years we've gone from 'one gene, one disease' to the omnigenic model, which posits that many genes all have a little role. Only in very few, rare diseases is there a single causative gene. You see: Every time we got too close to the 'end' of this particular area of knowledge, our Trickster God has added a weirder, more complex layer. 

Believing in such a deity, ludicrous as it may sound, frees us scientists up from the tyranny of beauty. We don't have to accept theorems or hypotheses because they are pretty, or work well. Instead this belief makes us expect that which we have already gotten used to: everything is a chaotic mess. I have yet to go into a project with assumptions A, B and C, and *not* finished up with results A + (something weird and unexpected), B + (something weird and unexpected), C + (something weird and unexpected), and hey there's also D, E, and F, and don't forget X. (The fraud, as Peter Medawar wrote in 1964, is that the scientific paper cuts out all the mess so just the clean story remains).

This belief 'explains' a question I recently had: has there ever been a research field that ever went and said 'Yep, that's it, we've researched all there is to it, time to close shop and retire!'? I don't think so - this has happened only when the most basic assumptions of the field turned out to be wrong, as in, for example, phrenology. The work of our Trickster God, again - basic assumptions turned out to be wrong, reality was weirder and more complex. In all other still-living fields, our Trickster God is hard at work adding weird layers to reality, possibly forever.

From a theological standpoint, belief in such a deity is endless fun - because if you got to close to actually making sense of this deity, it would not disappear into a cloud of logic, instead it would have to replace itself with something weirder, forever. You'll always have work to do!

For researchers, accepting such a position is useful, as it means you'll never run out of work. Our Trickster God will always invent more work. God does nothing but throw dice!
You may ask whether I actually want you to believe in such a deity. To that I say: You don't have to believe, but it's certainly useful, like the belief in freedom, justice, or love.
